Learning Clojure

http-agent

Can we do OO in clojure. Solar System Generator.

Revised intro to leiningen

PostgreSQL

How to make and distribute a clojure library. Simple-plotter.






-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Shitpissing FuckJesus!

Warning, this article is not suitable for children on account of its offensive title.

Come to think of it, I've probably just made not only my entire blog, but my very RSS feed NSFW.

No matter.

Wage slaves who willingly allow their employer to control what they read! Those who would rely on others to protect them from whatever those others consider to be obscenity, I am not talking to you!

Thieves who break their sworn contracts to read irrelevant blog posts using time that they have willingly sold their employer, I am not talking to you, either!

Those in the intersection of those categories, how the hell are you reading this??

Do you love my words so much that you are reading this *in your own time*! Wasting precious opportunities for reverse tele-commutation!

Then, if you are male, Welcome Brother! Forget what I said before.

And if you are female, read the paragraph above after replacing the word Brother with the word Sister.

Sorry. The word Sibling just would not cut it in the context. And I am a programmer by trade. Typing the same text twice would not only violate the principle of not repeating yourself twice, otherwise known as the virtue of laziness [Wall98]. It would get on my Aspergers.

Those who set up filtering software to protect themselves from their own definition of obscenity, I salute you and at the same time I cannot quite believe that you exist. Not, I imagine, that you will be reading this post any time soon, assuming you are any good at it at all.

Everyone else! Sorry. This was going to be the title of an innocuous post about the experiences I have had recently trying to say "totally" more often than is strictly necessary. Mais ça sera pour un autre jour. 

In future posts:

Sips: Hacking Your Own Mind at Four Years Old.
We rock at seeing. We suck at thinking.
Do you have both a laptop and a desktop?
Using a modern computer, running a language so far advanced into what we must wearily learn to call ´the future´ that it is incomprehensible to mortals, to do ZX81 style graphics. Party like itś 1979. Simple Plotter for Clojure.
Is noncommutability the reason for functional programming?
Totally!






