I've written before about how bright the full moon is.

Last night, I was driving to Sheffield, and at around half past ten, after about a hundred miles on the A1, I turned off the road into Sherwood Forest, and parked in a quiet layby for a smoke. 

It was far too cold to get out of my van, which is a comfortable place to sit anyway, and so, for I think the first time since I bought it ten years ago, I lit up in the cab.

There was a beautiful German mass on the radio, which I hadn't been able to hear properly with the engine running, but in the quiet and the darkness it was entrancing.

When my cigar was finished I carried on listening to it until it was over. After fifteen minutes in the dark I could see for miles, snowy fields and trees under the moonlight through the clouds.

Eventually I remembered that I had promises to keep. I started the engine, checked the empty road, indicated and pulled out.

After I'd been driving a few minutes it occurred to me that the light was a bit unusual. It seemed more flickery than normal, like the light from a flourescent tube, as the most moonlit of the clouds was obscured and revealed by passing trees.

"Oops", I thought. "Headlights."

Slightly embarrassed I reached for the switch and turned them on. Suddenly the cone in front of the car leapt out, daylight bright and in shocking colour. And the rest of the world disappeared.


Tonight I walked home from Stannington along the Stopes road, a few miles. The temperature is far below zero. The road is lit, but steep, and the pavements are covered in ice. It seemed safer to walk on the carriageway itself. There wasn't much traffic.

But there was some. I hate and fear cars at the best of times, but on an icy road, people not competent to drive on ice, driving cars too fast, with useless summer tires that will send them flying off the road should they meet black ice and a corner at the same time, are not reassuring companions.

If you don't like the way I drive, get off the pavements. And the lawns.

About half way back, there's a choice, to carry on the long way on the road, or short cut on the "Old Lane", an unlit track that you might get a horse or tractor up. It's usually a sea of mud, and today it's churned ice.

I took it anyway. It felt much safer away from the speeding steel. And the moon was out. There was plenty of light, and I felt sure-footed in a way I hadn't on the slippery road. It didn't seem nearly so dark.

Street lights on such a night aren't for pedestrians. They're for cars. They light the things that cars need to see. Car lights dazzle pedestrians so that they can't see properly most of the time.

You, Miss, who feel safer where there are lights. Consider that if you can only see the road, then you have no idea what might be lurking just off it.

Once upon a time, the moon lit the night. Now it's always dark.

Go on. What is the phase of the moon? Our ancestors knew.







