A Rendezvous at the Old Summer Palace


               Turning and turning in the widening gyre / The falcon cannot hear the falconer

King's College, the most beautiful building in all England, was host in the 1980s to a somewhat confused mixture of political beliefs.

I recall a night when the young ladies of the college offered themselves up for public auction in order to raise money for a new boat. The student union, fresh from the triumph of banning overtly heterosexual behaviour on college grounds, instantly mandated the cancellation of the event on the grounds that a slave auction would cause distress to the world's remaining slaves.

One of my favourite memories of studenthood is a happy evening of blazered boat club thugs called Kevin and vicious socialist workers called Galadriel throwing each other into an ornamental pond under the serene gaze of the beloved founder, all simultaneously howling liberation for women with equal outrage and conviction.

So when, last year, an organization calling itself the Red Guards challenged the blessed Saint Radegund to a game at King's College ground, I accepted assuming that it must be an old boys team either keeping the faith, or recalling it.

Given that the only decent cricket team King's ever put out was formed of Australian post-graduates and that those post-graduates are currently running Australia and so unlikely to be free, I thought we'd be well enough matched.

But no.

The Red Guards turned out to be composed almost exclusively of first-team cricketers from various fabled local sides, the few exceptions sporting University or County colours. Their kit alone was enough to inspire weakness and trembling in the faithful. And that was before I'd remembered what a bouncy track King's is on a baking summer day.

And yet, and yet... We fought them to a draw. Heroic performances from an unrecognisable Radegund XI left the Red Guards hanging desperately on to their last wicket, grimly dead batting through four tense overs.

That was by common agreement the best game any of us had ever played in. (footnote: Apart from Beard, who'd once been involved in an even more thrilling match against Pakistan in the Afghan highlands, with the fate of a province hanging on the result. A close-run thing by all accounts, and the history of Asia could have been very different had the local rules not valued the striking of a goat's head at an unprecedented 7 runs.)

Only we knew how much above ourselves we'd played that glorious day. It was thought that the rematch might be a different matter, if we met our more usual standard against a good team out for revenge. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

It had been remarked at the time that that one single game had wrecked the bowling figures of everyone involved for the entire season. One S. Haslemere had until that game been one of three bowlers performing roughly equally in terms of figures. By not playing while everyone else was getting biffed around he first acquired the commanding statistical lead which he was to hold on to for the rest of the Summer.

None of us pay, or have ever paid, the slightest attention to such silliness. But a number of summer excursions happened to coincide with this year's match.

We had no Nick, no Beard, no Ollie, no Joe. Even the brave sacrifice of young Dave Jessop, who consented literally to risk his life by making this most eagerly awaited hard contested game his fourth game, could not produce an eleven to face the coming storm. We called in desperation on our allies. One came.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

And there was gunmetal sky and a chilling wind. Old customs, old culture, old habits, and old ideas. 

A band of brothers out for revenge. Weak and ineffectual resistance from the old order. The Guards, campaigning tirelessly against our bourgeois tendencies, reigned in our intellectual elitism with high prejudice.

Lewis, the child of a former landlord, fatally lost the toss.

The Guards elected to bat, and their opening batsmen began their long march.

Finally Swarbrick fell to Evans. Blood on 43. But Menzies ground on implacably toward a titanic total, now joined by his brother and the runs piled on.

There was hope, then, when Cockcroft and Till conspired to take the wicket of the lesser Menzies with a glorious catch, and then immediately Jack hooked Pike, trapped before, fishing for a duck.

But we had succeeded only in bringing Hanglin to the wicket. He dispensed with the old custom of the single, and was a mortar of the revolution, the ball belted to the boundary in great leaps forward, over and over again.

And the Son of Heaven, in his desperation, brought your correspondent on to bowl, hoping to baffle the played-in, in-form, half- and sesqui-centurions with sheer lack of pace. One over and 15 runs later the experiment in Chinese Roulette was brutally terminated to the relief of everyone within range of the guns.

Eventually mighty Hanglin missed a straight one from Burberry, but it only brought his brother to the crease, and our re-education continued for more agonizing overs until the Guards declared their innings closed on a frightening 247 for 4. 

J. Menzies, whose previous highest score that summer had been 2, had contributed 130 of these runs.

Fifty overs of White Terror. But we were not dismayed. We had our Four Old Boys of Bradford. We had our radical, and our conservative factions.

We had our ringer, John Cockcroft, old friend of Tom's and Oxford Blue.

Excited youths took inspiration from Lewis's vague pronouncements, generally believing the sanctity of his words and making serious efforts to understand what they meant.

Factions quickly formed based on individual interpretations of his statements.

For a time it looked as though the day might go to the forces of reaction.

Lewis, and Grieveson, to 95 without loss against the fury. But a straight one missed, and straight then the capitalist hopping-dog Till gave Hanglin his first and most comical wicket.

But our glorious leader carried on to the divine fifty that has been his divine right this year, and Cockcroft our ringer played well, dug in, until he became, on 34, Hanglin's second wicket.

And we had 154-4, and time to get the rest.

But Jack who had lived by the lbw died by the lbw for 7, and I covered myself in a glorious 1 to give the Hanglin who had not dominated with the bat his fourth wicket, and on 164-6 Burberry, and Evans, looking down the pyramid of class beneath them, sagely dropped their anchors in the middle and stopped the rot.

And there was time, there was time, for it all to go wrong, but like wise and wily peasants they shut up their shops and they hid their corn.

And when Evans finally went, he went for one, but what an endless, glorious, destiny-filled one it had been, with the spirits of his ancestors breathless upon it, and in the last few overs, Downing and peerless Burberry opened up and took the Capitalist Road, and showed us what we might have been, and made the final score more flattering than it should have been.

And then our inspiration, our captain, our opening batsman, our wicket keeper, our god gathered us in his library, and slowly, and with a tear in his eye, and patiently he explained to us that the game was ended, finished, over and gone.
















































GAME 117 	
	
vs Red Guards (King's College Sports Ground 19th June 2011) 	
	
Red Guards Innings 	
	
Batsmen 	How Out 	Bowler 	Total 	Bowlers 	O 	M 	R 	W
Menzies, J 	Not Out 	        	130 	Grieveson 	8 	1 	34 	0
Swarbrick + 	c. Lawlor-Anderson      Evans 	11 	Evans 	9 	0 	37 	1
Menzies, G 	c. Till 	Cockcroft 	31 	Burberry 	8 	1 	44 	1
Pike 	b. 	Lawlor-Anderson                  0 	Haslemere 	3 	0 	34 	0
Hanglin, G 	b. 	Burberry 	        46 	Cockcroft 	8 	0 	44 	1
Hanglin, B 	Not Out 	          	8 	Lawlor-Anderson 	5 	1 	29 	1
Weatherley * 	
                                                  	Aspden 	1 	0 	15 	0
Stephenson 	

Rainsford 	

Connors 	
	
? 	
	
	Extras: 	21 	

	Total (for 4): 	247 	
	
	
Fall: 1-43 2-115 3-121 4-222 	
	
	
St Radegund Innings 	
	
	
Batsmen 	How Out 	Bowler 	Total 	Bowlers 	O 	M 	R 	W
Lewis, T * + 	l.b.w. 	Rainsford 	        56 	Stephenson 	5 	0 	33 	0
Grieveson, B 	b. 	Pat 	                40 	Connors 	9 	0 	47 	1
Till, B 	hit wicket 	Hanglin, B 	0 	Rainsford 	8 	0 	36 	1
Cockcroft, J 	c. Menzies, J 	Hanglin, B 	34 	Hanglin, B 	12 	1 	45 	4
Lawlor-Anderson 	l.b.w. 	Hanglin, B 	7 	Hanglin, G 	8 	2 	27 	1
Aspden, J 	c. Menzies, G 	Hanglin, B 	1 	Menzies, J 	2 	2 	0 	0
Burberry, J 	Not Out 	        	16 	
Evans, M 	b. 	Hanglin, G 	        1 	
Downing, J 	Not Out                  	9 	
Jessop, D 	Did Not Bat 	
Haslemere, S 	Did Not Bat 	
	
	Extras: 	30 	

	Total (for 7): 	194 	

Fall: 1-96 2-101 3-115 4-154 5-158 6-161 7-167 	
	
	
Stemming the Red Tide
A rendezvous at the Old Summer Palace


Mao, with a tear in his eye, telling the leaders of the red guards that the movement was over


King's College, the most beautiful building in all England, was in the 1980s a somewhat confused mixture of political beliefs.
Young ladies of King's College Boat Club decided to offer themselves up for public auction in order to raise money for a new boat.
Student's union banned a boat club slave auction because it was disrespectful to slaves.
Socialist workers called Galadriel vs boat club hoorays called Mike throwing each other in the fountain, both crying 'Liberation for Women'

lefty in the sense that the Worker's Revolutionary Party was thought to be 
Unwisely accepted an invitation to play the Red Guards at Kings, under the impression that they were a King's old boys side.
	
King's scene of greatest game in Rad history
baking sunshine, beautiful aspect
Parents coming down to watch. Team did me proud, photograph of me standing in shock and awe next to unheard of score of 229.
Best team we've ever played forced into batting out a draw.
Amusing episode of Hanglin, who had taken five of our wickets, running out his own brother, who had taken another three, rather spoiled when he went on to make 39 runs off about two overs.


Remarked on at the time was the fact that that single game had wrecked the bowling figures of everyone who bowled in it for the entire season.
Steve Haslemere had until this game been one of three bowlers performing roughly equally in terms of figures. By having not played while everyone else was being biffed around he acquired a commanding lead 

None of us pay, or have ever paid, any attention to such statistical silliness. It is a relic of unenlightened times, inappropriate for modern forms of the game. 

It was noticed the following year that various Summer holidays were booked only after the announcement of the fixture list.

Old customs, old culture, old habits, and old ideas

gunmetal sky, chilling wind

Campaigned tirelessly against our bourgeois tendencies
Reigned in our intellectual elitism with high predjudice.

	
Lewis, the child of a former landlord, fatally lost the toss.
	
Rad field shocking
J Menzies 130, previous highest score that season had been 2

Hanglin G, ran his brother out in previous game, and made up for it with five wickets and a fast forty. Brother had to settle for just the three.


scored vast numbers of runs very quickly


Lewis tries the desperate tactic of bringing me on to bowl, hoping to baffle the half- and the sesqui- centurion with extreme lack of pace. One over and 15 runs later the experiment was brutally terminated to the relief of everyone on the field.

Ben Till, first game for StRadegund, capitalist hopping-dog
did as much damage to his own wicket as he had to that of Menzies in the first innings.

Cockcroft, John, Oxford Blue leg spinner.


Four Olds. We had three old boys of Bradford Grammar.in Lewis, Barry, John Cockcroft, Jim Downing.

Fifty days of White Terror
Chinese roulette
Great Leap Forward

Radical and conservative factions

Excited youths took inspiration from Lewis's vague pronouncements, generally believing the sanctity of his words and making serious efforts to understand what they meant.

Factions quickly formed based on individual interpretations of his statements.


Hanglin G huge hitter, scored 46 very quickly.

No Nick, Beard, Ollie (thesping), or Joe

ringer John Cockcroft, old friend of Tom's, Oxford Blue and leg-spinner.

Jessop, turned up late, having got absorbed watching some cars going down the capitalist roads of Monaco. (Monaco Grand Prix)

Captain, Wicket Keeper, Opening Batsman, announced, with a tear in his eye, that the game was over.

Red Guards have a habit of bringing pairs of good brothers. Ben Till glorious catch of G. Menzies





----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Best game ever
Fought good team to a winning draw
parents present
highest score ever
high point of season
coming of age

Guards seeking revenge
Rad understaffed
players scrounged Ben Till, a friend of Burbs from London, and J Cockcroft, a friend of Tom's
Dave Jessop bravely shows up for his fourth ever game of cricket

Guards win toss
elect to bat.
Opening batsman undismissable, accumulates slowly
Swarbrick falls. first wicket for 43.
Menzies grinds on, second wicket for 115.
Hope when Jack immediately hooks Pike, fishing for a duck
Enter Hanglin G, mighty biffing, piles on the agony, puts total to a colossal 247
By the time he's out, the damage is done.

Rad reply starts well, Lewis and Grieveson taking it to 95 without loss, before Barry misses a straight one.
Ben Till's comic hop gives Hanglin B his first wicket.
Tom carries on to get the captainly fifty we've come to expect and rely on in this glorious year.
Cockcroft plays well, digs in.
J L-A dies as he lived, by the lbw
your correspondent covers himself in a glorious one (1-0-15-0 & 1 are worst figures ever? someone is bound to come up with something even more shameful.)
And at this point, with the total a long way off and wickets falling frighteningly fast, Burberry and Evans shut up shop. With only two batsmen to come, one of whom is the unblooded Jessop, this makes for a tense end to the game, but they're indomitable. By the time Evans finally departs (for one run, but what a run), it's not looking quite as scary as it was, and in the last few overs Jim Downing and the indomitable Burberry open up and play some lovely shots, making the final score of 194 rather more flattering than it might have been.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------













Guards seeking revenge
Rad understaffed
players scrounged Ben Till, a friend of Burbs from London, and J Cockcroft, a friend of Tom's
Dave Jessop bravely shows up for his fourth ever game of cricket

Guards win toss
elect to bat.
Opening batsman undismissable, accumulates slowly
Swarbrick falls. first wicket for 43.
Menzies grinds on, second wicket for 115.
Hope when Jack immediately hooks Pike, fishing for a duck
Enter Hanglin G, mighty biffing, piles on the agony, puts total to a colossal 247
By the time he's out, the damage is done.

Rad reply starts well, Lewis and Grieveson taking it to 95 without loss, before Barry misses a straight one.
Ben Till's comic hop gives Hanglin B his first wicket.
Tom carries on to get the captainly fifty we've come to expect and rely on in this glorious year.
Cockcroft plays well, digs in.
J L-A dies as he lived, by the lbw
your correspondent covers himself in a glorious one (1-0-15-0 & 1 are worst figures ever? someone is bound to come up with something even more shameful.)
And at this point, with the total a long way off and wickets falling frighteningly fast, Burberry and Evans shut up shop. With only two batsmen to come, one of whom is the unblooded Jessop, this makes for a tense end to the game, but they're indomitable. By the time Evans finally departs (for one run, but what a run), it's not looking quite as scary as it was, and in the last few overs Jim Downing and the indomitable Burberry open up and play some lovely shots, making the final score of 194 rather more flattering than it might have been.










































































