John Lawrence Aspden

Contract Programmer (Assembler, Embedded C, C++, Java, Python, Lisp, Scheme) 
Cambridge, England 

£45/hour 

Will negotiate fixed price contracts. 

phone: (+44) 7742 918198 
email: cv@aspden.com

I'm looking for contract programming work in Cambridge. I like challenges.

I have a degree in mathematics from the University of Cambridge. I'm also interested in Computer Science.

My favourite computer books are: The C Programming Language, Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, Structured Analysis and Design, The C++ Programming Language, The Mythical Man-month, Peopleware, The Practical Guide to Structured Systems Design, Dive into Python and the 1979 TRS80 Basic manual. 
Commercial Contracts
2006 Brain Mapping Unit, University of Cambridge 
Python, C, SWIG, Signal Processing (wavelets, Hurst exponent), MATLAB, Octave 
I wrote software to calculate statistics on the output of a brain scanner. The initial prototyping and tests were in python for speed of development, and the final program was a C library. I used SWIG keep the original unit test framework.

2005 Sepura
( 3 separate contracts ) 
Embedded C, Python, Visual C++, make, Subversion, CVS, Frontpage, Windows Comms, Unicode, CJK fonts, LGPL
I solved some mysterious bugs in a project to split DSP code across several code pages, and then automated the build process and dependency generation. I debugged a browser-based error tracking/change control system. I converted an ancient program to use Windows Comms and work with Chinese, Korean and Japanese scripts.

2004 Alphamosaic
Embedded C, Assembler, SIMD/Vector Processor, VideoCore, WMV9, Video Codecs
I ported the Microsoft WMV9 Codec to run on an embedded graphics chip.

2003 Sepura 
Embedded C, Assembler, AVR, Mega128, Codevision, High Speed Serial Comms, Device Drivers, Delphi
I designed the software for a dashboard mounted police radio console, as well as a PC test harness in Delphi. I wrote drivers for a 900kb serial link over a 10 metre cable (lots of fun with oscilloscopes!).

2001 Simoco Digital Systems
ClearCase, HTML, UI Design, Toolbook Instructor 
I was engaged to implement a new UI for a portable radio. I could see from the specifications that it would be less easy to use than the current UI, so I simulated it as part of the design work and showed the marketing people the simulator. This got the project cancelled and saved the company a fortune, partly at my expense.



2000 European Telecom/ET Voice 
Java, Swing, MATLAB, Mathematica, Research, Speech Recognition, TESPAR
I ran a small research project into embedded speech recognition using TESPAR, a newly discovered signal processing technique.

1999 Advantra 
Delphi, UI Design
I designed an application to test and configure pagers in shops. 

1999 CLMP Software Research / Salomon Brothers
Java, Solaris
I wrote a library of graphical java objects to display financial time series.

1998 Green Cathedral 
C++, HTML, Linux
I wrote a program to translate very large web server log files into readable html statistics and graphs. 

1997-98 Philips Paging 
Keil C and Assembler for 8051, Structured Analysis & Design, Protocols
I helped design the software architecture for a pager. I implemented a tiny filesystem which was considered for patent. In my own time I wrote a memory map and stack analyser for the Keil C compiler which was thought to have shortened the project several months by directing our optimisation efforts.

1996-97 Philips Telecom
Borland C, Serial and Wireless Comms, ClearCase
I maintained and extended a vast undocumented C program. I automated regression testing and version control.

1989-96 King's College Cambridge
dBase IV 
I designed and implemented databases for the college hardship fund, teaching activity (including my own!) and admissions as three separate fixed price contracts over six years, while I was still a student. 
Education
1992-96 Imperial College London 
Finite Element Analysis, Financial Analysis, C, Fortran
I investigated computer solution of non-linear diffusion problems, using Functional Analysis and the Finite Element method. I taught mathematics and Fortran in London and microeconomics in Cambridge. I realised that I liked computers more than research and went and got a proper job instead.

1988-91 King's College Cambridge 
Degree in Pure and Applied Mathematics (2:1)
Interests: Functional Analysis, Dynamical Systems, Topology, Markov Chains, Numerical Analysis, Quantum Mechanics.

1981-86 Abbeydale Grange School 
8 O Levels, 5 A Levels (AAAAB), STEP & S Levels Maths(1) Physics (1) Further Maths(1). The usual stuff with TRS80s, ZX81s, Spectrums, BBCs and Amstrad 1640s.

