Bishop Barrington School: Art Department Scheme of Work:

Jon Burgerman - Level 5 to Level 6

Lesson
Learning Objective
Outline of Lesson
Keywords
What Pupils Produce
Success Criteria






Lesson One: Introduction To Jon Burgerman’s Art. 

Today we are learning how to take creative risks when exploring, experimenting and responding to ideas.   

Pupils look at examples of work by Jon Burgerman. View & Discuss (Content, Form, Process, Mood). Title page in sketchbook working A3 size.         

Style Content Form Process Mood Loose Distinctive Contemporary Influence

Pupils create a title page in their sketchbook based on the work of Jon Burgerman - using appropriate materials, techniques and processes.    

Good use of formal elements. Clear Burgerman influence. Fills the page. Clear title.





Lesson Two: Doodling!

Today we are learning how to select images to demonstrate our research into the work of an artist.

Pupils look at doodles they have brought in and examples of Burgerman’s work. They choose sections to enlarge and develop into small Burgerman style drawings.
       
Doodle Loose Style Select Enlarge Modify Display Layout

Pupils create a double page spread in their book showing their own research into Burgerman’s work. They include some of their own doodles and enlarge sections from some and add colour in Burgerman’s style.

Pupils write own success criteria in lesson after looking at example book.






Lesson Three: Cultural Context.

Today we are learning how to illustrate our understanding of the cultural and social context of the artwork we are studying.

Pupils look at the cultural context of Burgerman’s work and dev elop an understanding of the place it has in contemporary art. They view and discuss work created by Burgerman’s peers and comment no the type of people it would appeal to.

Context Contemporary Style Function Influence Use Purpose

Pupils create a page in their sk etchbook looking at the meaning of context and res earching the work of Burgerman’s peers. They include notes that communicate their own personal response to the work. 

Pupils write own success criteria in lesson after looking at example book.





Lesson Four: Techniques & Media.

Today we are learning how to select and use appropriate materials and techniques when creating works of art.

Pupils complete a workshop that explores a variety of techniques they can use when c reating their work. They explore acrylics, pens , computers, pencils, printing and mak e reasoned evaluations about their outcomes. They comment on relevant H&S practices.

Technique Proces s Media Material Evaluation Health & Safety

Pupils create an A2 sheet that shows a variety of experiments with techniques processes and media. They clearly make notes and evaluate each technique and add relevant H&S advice.

Each technique has its own success criteria for pupils to work towards. They refer to these within their annotations and evaluations.





Lesson Five: Surfaces. 

Today we are learning how to accept creative risks and explore ideas independently and inventively. 

Pupils choose a design from their doodle sketchbook to recreate on a variety of surfaces. They use a range of techniques and media to create their work.         

Style Loose Distinctive Influence Proces s Media Technique Enlarge Develop

Pupils create a variety of small scale works on a range of surfaces. They stick these into their sketchbook and evaluate their successes and failures. They explore a variety of techniques.

Pupils write their own succes s criteria based on the surface they are using.


Lesson Six: 3D Versions Of Characters.

Today we are learning how to use resources imaginatively to develop, design and make work.

Pupils look at the 3D characters created by Burgerman and adapt their own doodles into 3D models. They explore the use of modelling clay and write about the problems they have when creating something 3D from something 2D.

3D Develop Model Adapt Refine Experiment

Pupils choose one of their doodles (or a Burgerman one) to develop into a small scale 3D model. They take photos of the process to create a page in their book that documents their experiment. 

Use of a variety of tools. Experiments with scale. Clear influence of Burgerman’s style. Look at examples of Burgerman’s work. Experiments with use of colours.


Lesson Seven: Artist Workshop*

Today we are learning how to consider and discuss the ideas methods and techniques used by an artist.

Pupils have a day or 1/2 day session with Jon Burgerman. They view his work and discuss his style and use of techniques. He helps pupils develop their own work and demonstrates his own practice to the class.

Technique Style Practice Discuss

Pupils ask Jon to make notes in their sketchbooks and tak e photos of him at work. They produce a page in their book documenting the day and detailing their experience. 

Show how Jon Burgerman has influenced your work. Take plenty of photos. Use the ideas and experience to help inform further development.



 

Lesson Eight: Design Ideas.

Today we are learning how to apply our knowledge to realise our intentions.

Pupils look at their work and research and develop an idea for a final piece inspired by the work of Burgerman. They develop their idea and consider how they might us e different surfaces to create their final piece upon.

Design Develop Creativity Surface Individuality Found Objects Context Purpose

A3 pages in their book showing the development of a final design - with appropriate and relevant notes. An A3 page looking at the variety of surfaces they can use to create their final piece.

Variety of final ideas. Explore 2D and 3D options. Clear link with research and own drawings. Appropriate use of colour, line, shape and form.
